
SUBJECT:

alpha_0.c:nand_read()
possibly other functions,
possibly other drivers.
likely the use case manual.

OBSERVED:

When I originally created this bug on 2022-08-21, I logged this
incorrect obseervation:

   nand_read loop decrements length so that it is 0 upon return.

On 2023-04-03, Vanderbilt University's Mark Wutka independently
rediscovered this bug while converting the alpha_0.c:nand_read()
implementation to Frama-C and reasoning about its properties.  Unlike
my above initial observation, his observation was accurate:

   One of the difficulties I had is that length is declared as an
   unsigned int. Normally for loops, you can declare a variant
   variable or property that must tend towards 0, but is allowed to be
   negative when the loop terminates. The bug I found was that since
   nand_read is supposed to return 0 when successful, it is not
   returning 0 when the loop terminates. I probably would not have
   found it if length was declared as int, because it would have been
   ﬁne with length being -1 coming out of the loop.

EXPECTED:

Like my initial observation of the loop's behavior, my initial
expectation of its correct behavior was also incorrect:

    Loop should return the number of bytes read, not 0.

Determining the actual correct behavior will require some
reinvestigation of the actual Linux raw NAND flash storage driver
behavior, as the pertinent details didn't make it from my notes into
the use case manual's design spec.  A brief look confirms these facts:

    - The use case Alpha drivers are meant to emulate the Linux
      readsb() macro from include/asm-generic/io.h.  This macro uses
      an unsigned int for its length count.  The use of an unsigned
      rather than signed int may be unusual as Mark pointed out, but
      it is the correct choice in this case.

    - The readsb() macro is a void function - it doesn't return the
      number of bytes read, nor does it return 0.  It returns nothing.

    - The NAND_OP_DATA_IN_INSTR case of the gpio_nand_exec_instr
      command interpreter helper function in Linux's foxtrot-style
      drivers/mtd/nand/raw/gpio.c driver (indirectly) calls readsb()
      and then explicitly returns 0.  It never returns a non-zero
      value to indicate an error.  All the instruction cases return 0
      in this fashion except for NAND_OP_WAITRDY_INSTR, which will
      return a nonzero value on timeout.  gpio_nand_exec_op will quit
      interpreting instructions and return a nonzero value to the NAND
      framework if a timeout occurs, otherwise it returns 0 to
      indicate all is well.

We need some investigation into what the correct behavior ought to be.
The comments in the driver code do not describe the correct behavior
and will also need fixing.

The use case manual spec may also need fixing.
